Coding Conventions
You cannot get your lab signed off if you severely violate these conventions. Also, you will lose
marks on the Courseworks for violating these conventions. There may even be exam questions
about coding conventions. In your later employment, you will find companies care about this
and will enforce a coding convention.
1. All class names will begin with a capital letter (e.g. MyClass and not myClass).
2. All variables/attributes and methods (except the constructor) will begin with a small
letter and be camel case (e.g. iLoveJava and not ILoveJava or i love java)
3. All constants will be all caps with underscores. (e.g. I STILL LOVE JAVA and not iStillLoveJava
or ISTILLLOVEJAVA)
4. Constants can be public or private. Attributes will never be public. Attributes will only
be accessed through methods.
5. All of the constants and attributes of a class always appear at the top of the class. They
are followed by all of the methods.
6. Binary operators will have spaces around them (e.g. i + j and not i+j). This includes
the : in a for each loop.
7. Unary operators will never have a space around them (e.g. i++ and not i ++).
8. Every block of code (encased in ’{’ and ’}’) will be indented consistently with the left
edge of the contents of that block aligned: classes, loops, if statements, case statements,
methods and others. You can use tabs or spaces, but try not to use a mixture of the two.
9. Every block of a loop and if statement will always require ’{’ and ’}’. You will not omit
them.
10. The ’(’ and ’)’ characters in statements will be flush to the beginning and end of the
statement. (e.g. if (x == 0) { and not if ( x == 0 ) {)
11. Methods and classes will be documented using JavaDoc. You are expected to use this
style for the coursework. There will be some flexibility here, but at the very least you
must always comment your methods by stating what it does, all of its parameters, and its
return type. Always comment your classes stating what the purpose of the class is.
12. Complex bits of code in a method should have their own inline comment and be placed
in a block separated by blank lines around it. You can, and will, lose marks for overcommenting. Overcommenting occurs when you have comments that do not add to the
explanation of the code (e.g. int i = 0; //initialising i to zero.)
13. Any objects which will be printed to the command line should have a toString() method
which formats them appropriately.

See FAQs overleaf.

1

Frequently Asked Questions
• Do I need to comment everything? Yes! See previous page.
• How much commenting does a class need? Not quite as much as you fear. One
comment per class is needed, with its purpose. Author, date, and revision history are
optional.
• How much commenting is needed for a method? A method should state what
it does, what the parameters, and what the return type is—–unless either of these are
empty. Getters and Setters can have one comment for the block.
• Do I need to format the Javadoc and provide output? Not for this module.

2

